Pompeo Shifts Russia Focus to Another Issue: Religious Freedom
Image
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo is hosting a three-day summit next week on religious freedom, the first such event at the department. Credit Credit Pool photo by Andrew Harnik
By Elizabeth Dias

July 19, 2018
WASHINGTON — As the Trump administration continues to deal with the fallout of the president’s conflicting statements this week about Russian electoral interference, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Thursday focused attention on another issue involving Russia, saying that the United States hoped to advance religious freedom in that country. But he did not raise specific concerns about religious repression in Russia or suggest remedies that the United States might be seeking.

“We are hopeful that the engagement that the president had with President Putin puts us in a direction where the conversations we can have with the Russians begin to turn this in the right direction,” Mr. Pompeo said, referring to President Trump’s meetings with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Monday. “That was the president’s objective in going to Helsinki, and I am confident that we achieved that.”

Mr. Pompeo was speaking to a small group of reporters ahead of the State Department’s three-day summit next week on religious freedom. He said the United States believes that “religious intolerance is unacceptable” and aims to promote religious freedom in every country, whether or not it is an ally.

To bolster his contention that the United States takes the issue seriously, Mr. Pompeo pointed to use of the Magnitsky Act, a 2012 law that the United States has invoked to impose sanctions on human rights violators in Russia. The Kremlin deeply dislikes the law and wants it overturned.


Asked if he was concerned about Russian attempts to infiltrate American religious groups, including the National Prayer Breakfast — which was attended in 2016 and 2017 by Maria Butina, a Russian accused by federal prosecutors this week of working as a covert agent — Mr. Pompeo said the United States is “concerned any time any country attempts to interfere with religious freedom of any individual.”

“This administration has been incredibly strong with respect to pushing back against Russian bad behavior across its broad range of bad behaviors,” he said.

Earlier this year, the State Department declined to name Russia as a country of particular concern on religious freedom, against the strong recommendation from the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom that Russia receive the highest possible designation of concern for its aggression in Crimea and the torture and imprisonment of Crimean Tatar Muslims, and for its banning of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

Asked if Mr. Trump had discussed these concerns with Mr. Putin in Helsinki, Mr. Pompeo said, “We have broad relationships with many of these countries, so religious freedom is not the only issue, but the world should know that America highly values religious freedom.”

At the State Department’s conference next week, the United States will be making the case that religious freedom benefits countries economically and diplomatically, Mr. Pompeo said.


Mr. Pompeo declined to answer a question about whether the State Department had invited any Russian government officials, civic leaders or religious groups to participate in next week’s conference.

Vice President Mike Pence will speak at the conference, as will the United States’ ambassador for international religious freedom, Sam Brownback. Some 80 representatives from foreign countries are slated to attend, including about 40 foreign ministers.

Mr. Trump has elevated the issue of religious freedom in the United States since taking office, leading some to question which religious groups were benefiting from his policies.

In January, the Trump administration moved to protect health care workers who object to performing procedures like abortion, prompting praise from Christian conservatives and alarm among civil and gay rights groups, who describe it as a systematic license to use religion to deny health care to patients.

Some religious groups, including the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, also objected to Mr. Trump’s ban against travelers from several Muslim-majority countries, which was recently upheld by the Supreme Court.

Many conservative Christian political groups are slated to sponsor side events to the State Department conference, including the Alliance Defending Freedom International, Concerned Women for America, Save the Persecuted Christians Coalition, the Southern Baptist Convention, and the James Dobson Family Institute, according to an unofficial schedule seen by The New York Times.
