Weird Christmas
Image
“The Northfolk Stage at Christmas,” an illustration by Robert Seymour, from Thomas Hervey’s “The Book of Christmas” (1836). Credit Credit Robert Seymour
Amazon
Local Booksellers
Barnes and Noble
When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.

By Amy Bloom

Dec. 1, 2017
CHRISTMAS
A Biography
By Judith Flanders
Illustrated. 245 pp. Thomas Dunne Books / St. Martin’s Press. $24.99.

Modern Christmas is a secular sham, and all the glorious, meaningful and ancient, often religious, traditions are being drowned in a vile pile of cheap paper, expensive pink trees and SpongeBob Santas.

Judith Flanders isn’t having it. She likes Christmas (I think), but she loves reality and its awkward, amusing facts. (A previous book of hers, “Inside the Victorian Home,” is deep, bright and encompassing.) What she’s not a fan of: the lazy, drippy, delusional Christmas mythmaking nonsense of Northern Europe, the United Kingdom and, most notably, the United States. Heartbroken that someone’s trying to take the Christ out of Christmas? Not Flanders. Not hardly. She observes that it’s been barely noticeable as a major Christian birth-of-Christ celebration in most of the world … ever. Alcohol, on the other hand: practically timeless in its appeal on Christmas Day, from medieval times on.

Image
Flanders has unearthed all sorts of interesting facts, none of them dull, the tower of them a bit overwhelming. She spends a detailed 245 pages showing us that Christmas Future is whatever people will need it to be; Christmas Present is what people need now and usually includes a tree-type thing and Santa-type being. It’s Christmas Past that’s the mother lode. That’s where every tradition comes from, whether it’s very, very old (lots of food, heavy on the joints of meat, cakes and cookies and even heavier on the wassail) or faux vieux (like caroling in the mid-1800s, for instance, introduced by people who pretended that the songs had been handed down from “the imaginary pastoral of Merrie England” and that gambling, a traditional Christmas pastime in England, never happened).


Because there are so many bibelots, knickknacks and trinkets of information, Flanders has marked their appearance in “Christmas” with small wingdings in the margins (“Carnival and riot,” “Drinking — and drunkenness,” “Food and feasting,” “Gifts and gift-giving,” “Gift-bringers,” “Greenery,” “Music and dancing” and “Religion”), so that if you have a particular hankering for one of these subjects, you can flip right to it. For example: On Page 192, you can find wingdings for gifts, decoration and plum puddings. It’s as if all ill-fitting sweaters came in specially striped wrapping paper, to give you a heads up.

On the subject of wrapping paper and gifts, Flanders pays special attention to the older custom of gifts as a form of tax paid to the rulers and landlords of the 15th and 16th centuries (as standing ovations are in the White House this season), which is transformed by the 19th century, especially under the influence of Dickens, into a new, child-centric tradition of parents giving gifts (manufactured gifts, not homemade ones) to their children. From shotguns, fireworks and whiskey, the holiday becomes — in the words of President Grover Cleveland — a day of “reunion of families” and “the social intercourse of friends.”

What Flanders shows most clearly is that holiday traditions are constantly being invented to give people what they long for, and that the heart of our most modern tradition is the belief that “whatever was happening in the world that was wrong … Christmas would bring it to a halt for a period of peace and companionship.” Christmas, Flanders tells us (and persuades me), offers a wonderful “illusion of stability, of long-established communities, a way to believe in an imagined past … while unconsciously omitting the less desirable parts of those times.” She demonstrates that the greatest transformations in the celebration of Christmas came after revolutions “in family, religion, personal and social relationships” — which brought in irreversible and sometimes frightening change.

We love and miss the past that never was and that — along with the fat guy in the red suit (who, in the Austrian context, used to be “half-goat, half-demon” and ate bad children for dinner) and the domestic decoration (which used to involve people wearing goat skeletons on their heads) and the celebration of family (which used to be the time for the ruling class to receive “costly items” from those further down the hierarchy) — is what it’s all about. Christmas, as Flanders says, “is what we hope for.”


Amy Bloom’s latest book, “White Houses,” a novel of Eleanor Roosevelt and Lorena Hickok, will be published in February.
