Trump Vows to Release Mideast Peace Plan Within 4 Months
Image
President Trump met with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel on Wednesday in New York. Credit Credit Tom Brenner for The New York Times
By Mark Landler

Sept. 26, 2018
President Trump said Wednesday that he hoped to present his long-anticipated peace plan for Israel and the Palestinians within four months, and said he favored a two-state solution to the decades of conflict between the two sides.

Speaking before a meeting with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, Mr. Trump was more declarative than he has previously been about both the timing and nature of the proposal his administration has been working on in secret for nearly 20 months.

Mr. Trump said he liked a two-state solution, adding, “That’s what I think works best.”

Previously, Mr. Trump has said that he was open to either a Palestinian state alongside Israel or a single Israeli state, and that the decision should be up to the parties. “I am looking at two-state, and one-state, and I like the one that both parties like,” he said in February 2017.

[Read our live updates on the United Nations General Assembly, including a Security Council briefing that President Trump is chairing.]


The White House has kept timing of the plan — which is being drafted by Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, and Jason D. Greenblatt, the former chief lawyer of the Trump Organization — under tight wraps.

On Wednesday, Mr. Trump said he planned to release it “over the next two to three to four months.”

In March, administration officials said the plan was nearly finished and would be released soon.

Mr. Trump repeated his contention that his formal recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital would open the door to a deal, despite the angry reaction of the Palestinian leadership, which severed communication with the White House after he announced the decision to move the United States Embassy to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv last year.

“I took probably the biggest chip off the table,” Mr. Trump said. “Israel got the first chip, and it’s a big one; there’s no question.”

He reiterated that Israel would have to make some kind of reciprocal gesture to the Palestinians, but he did not offer any details.
