Sloane Stephens Beats the Heat and a Mysterious Opponent
Image
Sloane Stephens defeated Anhelina Kalinina in the second round of the U.S. Open on Wednesday. Credit Credit Uli Seit for The New York Times
By Scott Cacciola

Aug. 29, 2018
Sloane Stephens had her share of challenges on Wednesday in her second-round match at the United States Open. She labored with her serve. She fussed with a blister on her right palm. She coped with the oppressive heat. (Perhaps you’ve heard about the heat? It was hot again.)

And then there was her opponent, a 21-year-old qualifier from Ukraine named Anhelina Kalinina, who seemed almost impervious to the pressure and the elements.

Stephens, the defending women’s champion and the third seed, survived with a 4-6, 7-5, 6-2 victory that required her to spend 2 hours 46 minutes baking in the midday sun at Arthur Ashe Stadium. It was not the most pleasant experience for Stephens, and the physical effects could linger in the coming days, but she at least took solace in the win.

“Sometimes, it’s not going to be the best,” she said, “but you just have to battle through.”

Nobody was immune from the conditions at the Open on Wednesday, with temperatures again hovering in the mid-90s and the tournament’s extreme heat policy in effect.


Andy Murray and Fernando Verdasco toiled for 3 hours 23 minutes at Ashe Stadium. The final game alone lasted 18 points and more than 10 minutes. Murray saved two match points, but eventually succumbed, 7-5, 2-6, 6-4, 6-4.


Image
Andy Murray's eight-match winning streak against Fernando Verdasco came to an end. Credit Uli Seit for The New York Times
In many ways, Murray resembled his old self. He screamed at himself — a lot. He bickered with the chair umpire. He tossed his racket in frustration. Parts of his game looked familiar, too, like his punishing ground strokes and his desire to win.

But about eight months removed from hip surgery, Murray again has found his comeback to be halting, full of peaks and valleys. Murray, a former world No. 1 and three-time Grand Slam champion, entered the Open ranked 382nd and was playing his first tournament with a best-of-five-set format since returning to tour in June.

“It’s still quite early in the process for me,” Murray said. “I did all right. I chased balls down right to the end of the match. I wasn’t giving up on points. It wasn’t the most comfortable I felt on a tennis court. But I got through it and fought right to the end.”


John Isner, the No. 11 seed experiencing his finest season at age 33, was pushed the five sets but avoided a second-round upset with a 6-7 (9), 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (2), 6-4 win over Nicolás Jarry.

Venus Williams and Serena Williams spared themselves from marathons, perhaps in prepartion for one. Venus rallied from a break down in the second set to defeat Camila Giorgi, 6-4, 7-5, and several hours later, Serena beat Carina Witthöft, 6-2, 6-2, to set up a matchup between the sisters in the third round.

The Williams sisters have played each other 29 times in their decorated careers, with Serena winning 17 of their matches.


Image
Anhelina Kalinina wraps a towel around her head during a break. The temperature reached the mid-90s for the second day in a row. Credit Uli Seit for The New York Times
“It’s definitely a tough draw,” said Venus Williams, who quickly got annoyed at her post-match news conference with a series of questions about her sister. “You’re beating it up now. Any other questions about anything else?”

Stephens’s opponent in the third round will be Victoria Azarenka, who advanced with a 6-1, 6-2 win over No. 25 seed Daria Gavrilova.

A tremendous hardcourt player, Azarenka, 29, has had quite a bit of success at the U.S. Open over the years, including two runner-up finishes and a junior championship. But she had not played in Flushing Meadows since 2015. She gave birth to her son, Leo, in 2016, and then missed last year’s tournament because of a child custody issue. Despite recently raising her ranking to No. 79, Azarenka needed a wild card to gain entry into the Open.


Azarenka and Stephens last met in March at the Miami Open, where Stephens won their semifinal in three sets.

“It was a good match,” Azarenka said, “but I had my chances there.”

A year ago, Stephens entered the Open unseeded and ranked 83rd in the world, not far removed from an 11-month layoff because of injury. What happened next was tournament magic: She engineered a championship run that included victories against Venus Williams and Madison Keys as she became the fifth unseeded woman to win a major title in the Open era.

In her return this week, she has been greeted by swarms of fans — and lofty expectations. She came in having played solid tennis in recent months, reaching the final at the French Open and the Rogers Cup in Montreal. She then won her first-round match against Evgeniya Rodina of Russia in straight sets.


On Tuesday, as a heat wave settled over New York, Stephens did what she could to rest ahead of her second-round match. She intended to eat out with a friend, she said, but then discovered that the restaurant was five blocks from her hotel. Stephens made it exactly one block before she turned around.

“It was so hot outside, I was like, ‘Nah, fam, not happening,’” Stephens said. “We walked to the corner and back. That was basically my afternoon.”

In hindsight, that might have been the wisest move Stephens could have made. She wound up needing all of her stamina against Kalinina, who had arrived as a total mystery to Stephens — and to pretty much everyone else who watched the match at Ashe. Kalinina was making her first main-draw appearance at a Grand Slam event after winning three matches in qualifying.


“I had literally never even seen her before,” Stephens said. “Like, when I walked on court, I was like, ‘O.K., that’s who that is.’ Obviously a bit different.”

Against Kalinina, Stephens won just 56 percent of the points on her first serve and committed 42 unforced errors. Her game would mysteriously disappear, then reappear just in time to avert total disaster. For example, she had a chance to serve for the second set, but was promptly broken by Kalinina. Stephens slumped her shoulders, regrouped and proceeded to win the next two games to even the match.

After munching on some sushi during a mandatory 10-minute heat break, Stephens made quick work of Kalinina in the third. The sushi, she said, was not a secret weapon.

“I just needed to eat something,” she said, “and that was what they brought me.”
