Ryan LaMarre’s Stunning Outburst Humbles the Yankees
Image
Ryan LaMarre hitting his second double of the night in the fourth inning. He also added a solo home run in the seventh inning. Credit Credit Adam Hunger/Getty Images
By Wallace Matthews

Aug. 30, 2018
Over his 18-season major league career, C.C. Sabathia had posted the equivalent of a pretty good season statistics line against the Chicago White Sox: a 19-6 record and 3.73 E.R.A., with 227 strikeouts over 234 innings in 36 career starts.

In contrast, the numbers from White Sox left-fielder Ryan LaMarre over parts of four major league seasons have been fairly undistinguished: one home run, 11 runs batted in and 37 hits, all but two of them coming this season.

But the former Cy Young Award-winning pitcher and the journeyman outfielder came together at Yankee Stadium on Wednesday, and it turned out to be no contest.

LaMarre drove in two runs with a double off Sabathia in the second inning, doubled in another in the fourth, then added a solo home run off reliever Chad Green in the seventh as Chicago beat the Yankees, 4-1. The White Sox, 27 games below .500, won the series, two games to one, and dropped the Yankees to seven and a half games behind the Boston Red Sox in the American League East race.


Manager Aaron Boone called the loss “disheartening” regardless of the opponent. “In this game you’re going to have some bumps where you lose to a team that maybe you don’t think we should lose to and that’s always frustrating,” he said. “But I think all losses stink.”

Still, it was a stunning career night from LaMarre, 29, who had been designated for assignment by the Minnesota Twins on July 2 and claimed off waivers by the White Sox nine days later. Before this season, LaMarre had appeared in 29 major league games, had 37 big-league at-bats and all of two singles in parts of three seasons with Cincinnati, Boston and Oakland.

“It’s a huge lift,” said LaMarre, who as a Twin was forced to pitch an inning against the Yankees during a 14-1 blowout in April and gave up a home run to Tyler Austin. “This will be an awesome flight home.”

And while Sabathia’s line — six innings pitched with five hits and three earned runs allowed — officially falls under the banner of “quality start,” it looked very much like a 38-year-old pitcher who may be wearing down as the season grinds on.

Making his second start since coming off the disabled list with a flare-up of the degenerative condition in his right knee, this was not the Sabathia who had struck out a season-high 12 White Sox on Aug. 7. Nor was it the Sabathia who pitched six scoreless innings to beat the Texas Rangers on Aug. 12.


This Sabathia was hit hard in the second inning not only by LaMarre, whose first double flew over the outstretched glove of Giancarlo Stanton in deep right field, but also by catcher Kevan Smith and first baseman Matt Davidson, who opened the second inning with back-to-back singles. Two innings later, LaMarre pulled a shot into the left-field corner to drive in Yoan Moncada, who had walked.

“With two strikes both times, and that’s always frustrating,” said Sabathia (7-5) of the second-inning hits by Smith and LaMarre. “I’ve got to make better pitches. I didn’t execute.”

The Yankees’ offense, after making some solid contact the first time through the batting order, could do little against White Sox starter Reynaldo Lopez, who had held them to a run on four hits over seven innings in the same Aug. 7 game in which Sabathia excelled. The Yankees got the leadoff hitter on base in five innings, and even loaded the bases with one out in the fifth, when they scored their only run on a Ronald Torreyes single.

They also fell victim to a freak play in the fifth, when Lopez’s first pitch to Stanton with the bases loaded scooted past Smith but bounced off the backstop and right back to him. His one-hop throw to Lopez nailed Gleyber Torres, who was trying to score from third.

“It was a good read,” Stanton said of Torres’s decision to try to score. “That’s a play where if he’s safe it’s a great job and if he’s out it’s not. But you can’t expect a perfect play like that.”

Stanton, who has played in 82 straight games and has not had a day off since May 29, has been stuck on 299 career home runs since Aug. 18 and has just six hits in his last 37 at-bats. He agreed that his body, which has been hobbled by a hamstring strain, might benefit from a day off.

“But we’re beat up right now and I’ve got to be a staple in there and help try to push us through this hard time,” Stanton said. “We’re all tired, we’re all beat up, but everyone else is playing the same game. We need a push. Not always from me every night, but if I’m out there I feel I have a chance to help us.”

Inside Pitch

Didi Gregorius, eligible to come off the disabled list on Thursday after sustaining a bruised left heel in a baseline collision on Aug. 19, took ground balls and batting practice on the field for the first time since his injury. But there is still no plan in place for his return, and Gregorius said the injury still pains him. “It’s not going away right away,” he said. “But I think I could play on it.” Manager Aaron Boone said Gregorius would be re-evaluated over the next 24 hours.
