A Mets Prospect Redefines the Meaning of a Lost Season
Image
Dominic Smith dropped 30 pounds, to less than 230 pounds from 260, throughout the 2018 season, but his hitting has not measured up. Credit Credit Mike Stobe/Getty Images
By James Wagner

Aug. 29, 2018
Dominic Smith needed to lose weight.

A lot of it.

And for a young baseball player who came from South Los Angeles and grew up often relying on fast food predominant there, it was no easy task to learn new habits. It took the past two off-seasons and a challenge from Mets management, but Smith, who is now 23, finally changed the way he eats — from his portion sizes to his food types.

As a result, he dropped over 30 pounds, from 260 down to less than 230, and throughout the 2018 season, he has kept the weight off.

“I don’t believe you can do this cold turkey,” Smith said earlier this year. “It’s not like you just wake up one day and stop eating the foods you ate for 20 years.”

Smith’s recognition of what it really took to get in shape seemed like an encouraging sign of maturity from someone the Mets hoped would become a power-hitting fixture at first base for the next decade. He was, it seemed clear, growing up.


And yet what Smith hasn’t done this year is justify the Mets’ decision to select him in the first round of the 2013 draft. Instead, as a player, he has gone backward — to the point where it is unclear how he figures in the team’s plans.

Nothing in baseball is a given, and a lot of top prospects never pan out. The twist, in Smith’s case, is that with improved discipline as a person, and what essentially amounts to a new body, he has yet to be rewarded with greater success. Making that reality even more harsh is that another young player, Peter Alonso, a second-round pick in 2016, has now leapfrogged Smith as the Mets’ top prospect at first base.

“Whenever you’re trying to introduce a minor league player to the majors, it’s not always a straight line,” said John Ricco, the Mets’ assistant general manager. “So it has been a little bit of a process with Dom. It’s not always, ‘Here’s an opening, here you go.’ You have to grab your opportunities when you get them.”

In three sporadic stints at the major league level this season, Smith has floundered. He has driven in three runs in 77 at-bats and has a disheartening .195 batting average. He has just two home runs.


Image
Smith, the Mets’ top draft pick in 2013, has not met expectations of being a slugger of the future. Credit Elsa/Getty Images
Last year, in a late-season major league debut, he barely hit any higher — .198 in 167 at-bats — but he did at least have nine homers.


Even worse, Smith has not hit well in the minor leagues this season, which at least he did in 2017.

Still, the Mets are planning to give Smith another shot in September. For now, he is teammates with Alonso in Las Vegas, where it is Alonso who is generally at first base and Smith pushed to left field.

The Mets have tried to frame Smith’s new position as a way for him to become more versatile. But as an outfielder, Smith is still raw and it showed last week when the Mets lost an extra-inning game to the San Francisco Giants after he barreled into shortstop Amed Rosario on a pop fly and knocked the ball loose.

Smith owned up to the mistake after the game. But a certain feeling felt inescapable — that in a lost season for the Mets, Smith, too, was sort of lost. Even during those periods when he has been on the Mets’ active roster, he has been something of an afterthought — not being given all that many chances to play.

“My expectations coming into this year, what I wanted to accomplish this year, are definitely different than what happened,” Smith acknowledged to reporters last week.

Smith said he thought he would be like Gleyber Torres of the Yankees or Ronald Acuña and Ozzie Albies of the Atlanta Braves — top prospects who have lived up to their hype with strong performances this season.

“I know that’s the potential I have, and I can do that,” he insisted. “So for it not to happen, and for me to go through this rough patch, it’s probably the first time I’ve ever really struggled in my life.’’


There is a paradox in all this. When Smith was heavier — and, as he admitted, more sluggish and achier — he moved steadily up the minor league ladder, always hitting for average, though never displaying the power of a true slugger.

Eventually, Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ former general manager, warned Smith that he needed to get lighter, both for his health and his long-term viability as a major leaguer.


Image
Smith bobbled a play against the San Francisco Giants last week, showing his inexperience in the field.

 Credit Frank Franklin Ii/Associated Press
That warning came in 2017, after a failed attempt to keep weight off during the season, and four years after the Mets drafted Smith out of Serra High in Gardena, Calif. and gave him a $2.6 million signing bonus. At the time, he was listed at 185 pounds and, generously, at 6 feet in height. He was not thin by any means, but his weight was not yet an issue. It soon would be, however, and the roots, in part, were probably in his upbringing.

Growing up, Smith said, his mother was often unemployed, his father at one point owned a dog kennel, and his older brother and sister worked to help keep the household afloat. Smith said it was often easier, and sometimes cheaper, for his family to eat quick meals from a box or from fast food chains.

“I wasn’t taught about clean eating, proper diets or the way you should eat,” Smith said earlier this year. “All we know is what we know. We didn’t see a big deal of what I was eating because it was normal.”

In the minor leagues, family members stayed with him the first few seasons and Smith found himself relying on a heavy diet of comfort foods, some home-cooked, which didn’t help his weight. And there were few, if any, alternatives in the clubhouse, because food offered by minor league teams is sparse compared to what is available in the majors.


Ultimately, Smith began to understand some of the larger forces — education, income, tradition, access to fresh food in underserved areas — that can play a role in unhealthy eating habits.

Yogurt and egg whites ultimately became Smith’s breakfast. Lunches and dinners were mostly broccoli and asparagus paired with seafood — meals he didn’t eat growing up. He said he enjoyed feeling full of energy and better about himself.

Reminders persist of how far Smith has come. Last off-season, a friend from Smith’s old neighborhood reached into the refrigerator at Smith’s apartment in Los Angeles and pulled out a container.

“He was like, ‘What is hummus?’ ” Smith recalled.

Being leaner, however, did not prevent Smith from missing nearly all of spring training this year with a quadriceps injury. More important, of course, is his continued inability to hit major league pitching.

Alonso, who is just six months older than Smith, is listed at 6-3 and 245 pounds. He is big, but his weight does not appear to be an issue; he is working on improving his defense. Instead, the only question is when he might be ready to play a position in the major leagues that once was being saved for Smith, the prospect who finally did everything right off the field only to see too much go wrong on it.
