Review: An Autumnal Patti Smith Remembers Summer in ‘Words and Music’
Image
Patti Smith with her son, Jackson Smith, at the Minetta Lane Theater on Saturday performing part of her memoir of a show, called “Words and Music.” Credit Credit Sara Krulwich/The New York Times
Patti Smith: Words and Music
Off Broadway,  Play ,  Poetry Reading/Spoken Word ,  Special Event
Closing Date: Sept. 24, 2018
Minetta Lane Theater ,  18 Minetta Ln.
800-982-2787
More Information
By Ben Brantley

Sept. 23, 2018

“Autumnal.” Patti Smith pronounces the word carefully, with the accent on the first syllable. And as she speaks it, an adjective acquires the weight of a noun, while a season is somehow transformed into a pervasive state of mind.

Such a state, both misty and ruefully clear, shimmers like a bright fog in the small, venerable Minetta Lane Theater, where “Patti Smith: Words and Music” opened on Saturday night for three performances. The Greenwich Village location has special significance for the 71-year-old Ms. Smith, the singer, poet, activist and best-selling memoirist.

As “a very young girl,” new to the city, she used to walk past this theater, she says, wondering wistfully about what was inside. Now occupying its stage — with a team of musicians made up of her son and daughter, Jackson and Jesse Paris Smith, and her frequent band mate Tony Shanahan — she announces she’s a little unsure as to what she’s doing there.

“This is supposed to be sort of a play,” she says. “So just go along with it.” When her daughter, who has been at the piano, slips offstage after the opening number, Ms. Smith looks concerned. “Where did you go, Jesse?” she asks anxiously. She grins at the audience. “I’m just the leader,” she says.


Ms. Smith is often described as “the godmother of punk.” But even during her first flush of fame in the mid-1970s, when she was a galvanizing presence at gritty downtown venues like CBGB, she had a radiant sentimental streak, a precocious awareness of time passed and passing.

She begins “Words and Music,” which is being recorded as part of the Audible theater program, by wishing her audience “Happy autumn equinox,” a salutation she follows with the poem “Autumn Day” by Rainer Maria Rilke. “The summer was immense,” she reads, and one woman’s bright, storied history seems to hover before us.

Ms. Smith captured long stretches of that history in two lyrical autobiographies, “Just Kids” (2010), an account of her early days in New York with the photographer Robert Mapplethorpe (1946-1989), and “M Train” (2015), about life with and after her husband, the musician Fred (Sonic) Smith (1948-1994). She keeps paperback editions of both books, marked with slips of paper, close at hand to read from. And two long-dead men, whose names she speaks with proprietary pride, become electrically present in their absence.

The production inevitably brings to mind another memoir of a show, the current hit “Springsteen on Broadway,” in which the rock star Bruce Springsteen alternates recitations from his autobiography with introspective performances of his songs. Mr. Springsteen collaborated with Ms. Smith in writing the ballad that became her one Top 40 hit, “Because the Night” (1978), a number she performs here as a hypnotic rhapsody.

“Words and Music,” though, is a much cozier affair than “Springsteen on Broadway.” The homey, lived-in-looking set was assembled by Jesse Paris Smith, and includes the family’s battered-looking “sacred chair,” as well as a shabby orange sofa. (Ms. Smith pauses over the color choice, but then concludes that its evocation of pumpkins is appropriate to the autumn theme.)


Clad in her signature black stovepipe pants, jacket and vest, with small braids at the front of her leonine gray mane, Ms. Smith dons spectacles whenever she reads and never seems to know quite where to put them afterword. She makes a few entertaining flubs, including calling “Ode to Billy Joe,” the Bobbie Gentry song, “Ode to Billy Joel.” “Did I really say that?” she asks. “Considering my intense dislike …” She intones the vamp from the theme song of “The Twilight Zone,” adding, “That sentence never happened.”

The songs, delivered in that shimmering clairvoyant alto, include “Peaceable Kingdom,” which she and Mr. Shanahan wrote in honor of the slain pro-Palestinian activist Rachel Corrie, and two collaborations with her late husband: the haunting lullaby they created for their infant son, and the anthemic “People Have the Power.” Ms. Smith also performed the thrilling “Dancing Barefoot,” a portrait of falling into vertiginous love, from her 1979 album “Wave,” with its explosive insistence on the word “She.”

Ms. Smith had yet to record “Wave” the first time I saw her onstage, when I was a college student. It was in a village club just a few blocks away from Minetta Lane. With her radioactive energy and fierce stare — which seemed to bore into a dimension only she could see — she seemed gloriously, transcendently alien.

I remember thinking she was too wildly otherworldly to live much longer than her hero, the symbolist poet Arthur Rimbaud, who died at 37. Now here she was, her hair the color of ashes, some 30 years later and still blazing, to conjure the immense summer of a life on this night of the autumn equinox.


Patti Smith: Words and Music
Minetta Lane Theater
18 Minetta Ln.
W. Village
800-982-2787
Category
Off Broadway,  Play ,  Poetry Reading/Spoken Word ,  Special Event
Opened
Sept. 21, 2018
Closed
Sept. 23, 2018
This information was last updated on Sept. 20, 2018

Tickets powered by Ticketmaster

Patti Smith: Words and Music
Through Sept. 24 at the Minetta Lane Theater, Manhattan; 800-982-2787, minettalanenyc.com. Running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.
