Jaap Takes Charge: The Week in Classical Music
Sept. 21, 2018
Image
Anna Netrebko rehearsing “Aida,” opening Wednesday at the Metropolitan Opera.  Credit Ramsay de Give for The New York Times
[Read all of our classical coverage here.]

Readers, listeners! The fall music season has now begun in earnest with the New York Philharmonic’s gala opening on Thursday, the start of Jaap van Zweden’s tenure as music director. We have Tony Tommasini’s review here:


Review: The Jaap van Zweden Era Begins at the Philharmonic
Sept. 21, 2018
I agree with Tony’s take: I loved the eerie, immersive Ashley Fure premiere, “Filament.” And Daniil Trifonov was a clever, creative soloist in Ravel’s Piano Concerto in G, persuasive even when reeeeally stretching second-movement phrases.

But “The Rite of Spring,” if shiny, was also stolid and sodden. And the encore, Wagner’s “Ride of the Valkyries,” was everything bad you’ve heard about Jaap: grotesquely overplayed and overemphatic.

Michael Cooper reports on the audience and encore: First came a few ripples of recognition at the opening strings from those who recognized it instantly. That was followed by smiles from those who found it delightful, and furrowed brows from those who found it a bit corny.


Then the brass blasted out the opening theme, cluing in those who know their Wagner mainly from “Apocalypse Now” and Bugs Bunny. And something happened that is all too rare: Throwing stuffy concert etiquette to the side, a loud, mid-performance cheer went up.

Listen to a bit of “Filament”:



Josh Barone writes: I can’t recommend “Filament” enough. There are three more opportunities to hear — experience, really — this work, a brilliant use of David Geffen Hall, and a fascinating study of musical teamwork and auditory perception. Among the things I enjoyed most about the piece was the way it made me aware of my place as an audience member. Through idiosyncratic staging, placing three soloists and 15 singers around the hall, and a mixture of acoustic and amplified sound, “Filament” draws attention to the roles everyone plays in a concert: the players working always to remain together, the group of strangers in the audience gathering for a shared experience. The effect — defamiliarizing a centuries-old ritual  — is like a musical analogue to the perception-driven artworks of Robert Irwin, and the Paul Valéry adage often attached to him: “Seeing is forgetting the name of the thing one sees.”


Also this week:

A superb vocal ensemble, the Crossing, came to town.

The Metropolitan Opera frenziedly prepared to open its own season next week, rehearsing a slew of operas at once.

The Royal Opera House in London completed a $66 million revamp.

I’m going down this weekend for Opera Philadelphia’s O18 festival, including Anthony Roth Costanzo’s eye-popping “Glass Handel” spectacle.

It’s designed to accompany his new album, “ARC”:


The project involved commissioning some astonishing music videos. Take a look at these two!



Enjoy! ZACHARY WOOLFE



Rory Cowal’s exciting new album, “Clusters,” carries the subtitle “American Piano Explorations.” That sounds pro forma, the sort of claim you could append to almost any program of modern and contemporary music.

But Mr. Cowal really is serious about surveying lesser known corners of the repertoire. The set opens with the title work, completed by Johanna Beyer in 1936. After this, he tackles a rarely heard étude, marked “Quasi Improvised,” by Muhal Richard Abrams, one of the founders of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians.

Mr. Cowal’s study of both classical and jazz traditions comes in handy toward the end of the set, when he takes on a new notated work by the pianist Kris Davis, a star of the contemporary jazz scene who is not bounded by any single tradition. The final movement of Ms. Davis’s “Eight Pieces for the Vernal Equinox” requires quick leaps between registers, as well as precise, stuttering meditations over individual notes, successfully merging states of tension and fluidity. SETH COLTER WALLS


Renée Fleming’s latest album, “Broadway,” is not her best. It does, however, mark an important career milestone. Timed to coincide with her pie-happy final performance as Nettie Fowler in “Carousel,” the release showcases Ms. Fleming at her most triumphantly populist and mainstream — at the same time she’s dubbing for Hollywood, dishing on her love of Joni Mitchell and the Roots, and lending her elegiac gifts to John McCain’s funeral.


The 17-tracks “Broadway” is an hourlong cabaret mishmash of fake-book staples (“Something Wonderful,” “Till There Was You”) and modern classics (Adam Guettel’s “Fable,” Jeanine Tesori’s lilting berceuse “Lay Down Your Head”). Many of these are sung with sensitivity and tastefully arranged.

But the diva’s relatability is occasionally overplayed, and Ms. Fleming offers a lot of emoting, superfluous jazz inflections and tipsy flirtations with rubato. She freights the lyrics of Maury Yeston, Stephen Sondheim and Cole Porter with such blubbery pathos, it’s not always clear the language is English.

She is, however, as always peerless as a Romantic Expressionist. And on standards like “All the Things You Are” and “Till There Was You” we hear what a soaring, richly hued operatic palette like hers can do for the great ballads of Broadway. JOEL ROZEN




“You’ve got to realize that opera is jazz’s grandma.”

What? That’s the claim the wonderful jazz vocalist John Boutté makes in Jack Sullivan’s fascinating book “New Orleans Remix,” published last year, and the first chapter, “Jazz Classical,” backs it up. Well known to concertgoers in New York for his lively, erudite program notes, Mr. Sullivan brings to life the musical renaissance that has been happening in recent decades in New Orleans by placing it in the context of that city’s long history as a hotbed of mingling musical genres — including, since the early 19th century, opera.

Mr. Sullivan quotes Mr. Boutté, a New Orleans native, and other musicians and historians about the influence of the coloratura soprano Luisa Tetrazzini on Louis Armstrong’s way of playing long, lyrical lines; the crosscurrents between Sicilian immigrant street bands and New Orleans jazz ensembles; and the common sensuality between Italian opera and Dixieland. With this history in mind, I heard hints of bel canto phrasing in Mr. Boutté’s beguiling jazz singing as well. Check it out above. ANTHONY TOMMASINI
